clircs documentation

This is the longer reference. Start with README.md if all you want to do is connect and chat. Use /help inside clircs for the current command list and /help command for exact syntax. That help is generated from the client, so it is less likely to lie after a command changes.

Data and configuration

User data is stored under the clircs directory in the current Windows roaming application-data folder. Use /config to display the exact location.

Use /set to inspect or change client settings. Use /help set to list setting groups. Use /help set setting for an explanation of one setting.

Use /network to inspect live network sessions and saved profiles. Network-specific items such as autojoin and user modes belong to logical network profiles, not individual server addresses.

Use /backup create to make a zip backup of the complete user-data directory. Use /backup list to inspect existing backups. Restore is intentionally manual for now: close clircs and replace the user-data files from a known-good backup.

Connections

/server host port
/server host port --tls
/server profile
/server host port --new
/server host port --password

The --new option creates another network session instead of replacing the current connection. TLS certificates are validated normally. A self-signed or otherwise untrusted certificate is shown to the user and may be accepted once or pinned for that endpoint. Certificates are not accepted blindly.

Unexpected disconnects can reconnect automatically when network.reconnect is on. Intentional /disconnect and /quit commands do not start automatic reconnect. KILL reconnect is controlled separately by kill.reconnect. Existing channel and query windows are preserved while a session is offline.

Saved TLS profiles support SASL PLAIN account authentication before IRC registration completes:

/network sasl profile account
/network sasl profile account required
/network sasl profile account optional
/network sasl profile
/network sasl profile off

The command prompts for the password without echoing it. PLAIN is allowed only over TLS. Required is the default: if SASL is unavailable or authentication fails, clircs disconnects instead of quietly continuing unidentified. Optional reports the failure and permits registration to continue. The account, mechanism, and failure policy are readable in networks.toml; the password is stored separately in network-secrets.json using Windows DPAPI protection tied to the current Windows user. Reconnects authenticate again with the current saved profile credentials.

SASL EXTERNAL authenticates with a TLS client certificate instead of an account password:

/network sasl profile external C:\path\irc-client.pfx
/network sasl profile external "C:\path with spaces\irc-client.p12" optional

The file must be a PKCS#12 bundle (.pfx or .p12) containing both the certificate and its private key. clircs prompts for its password without echoing it; submit a blank password if the bundle is unencrypted. After validating the bundle, clircs displays its SHA-256 fingerprint for use with the network's account services. The password is stored with the same Windows DPAPI protection as a PLAIN password, while networks.toml contains only the certificate path, mechanism, and failure policy. The server must advertise SASL EXTERNAL, and the certificate fingerprint must already be associated with the IRC account according to that network's services instructions. clircs sends the conventional empty authorization identity, allowing the server to select the account associated with the certificate.

Use /network sasl profile to inspect either mechanism and /network sasl profile off to remove its configuration and encrypted secret. Changing mechanisms replaces the previous mechanism's saved secret.

ZNC is the first explicitly tested bouncer. clircs keeps the client-to-bouncer connection separate from the bouncer-to-IRC-server state when it can obtain that information. Ordinary IRC should still behave like ordinary IRC instead of making every command care that a bouncer exists.

Windows and input

Each status, channel, query, result, and DCC window has a stable number. Use /window or /win to list them, /win number to switch directly, and /next or /previous to move through them. Unread activity is shown in the status bar and in /window.

Page Up and Page Down move through clircs scrollback. Up Arrow and Down Arrow move through command history for the current window. Tab completes channel nicknames and cycles through multiple matches.

The input line accepts traditional IRC formatting controls: Ctrl-B toggles bold, Ctrl-I toggles italic, Ctrl-U toggles underline, Ctrl-R toggles reverse, and Ctrl-O resets formatting. Ctrl-K starts or ends color formatting; after Ctrl-K, enter a foreground color number and optionally a comma followed by a background color number. The input line shows a visible control symbol while retaining the actual IRC control byte sent to the network.

Use /close to close the active window. Closing a joined channel parts it. Closing a connected status window requires /close --force because that also closes its network connection and associated windows.

Everyday IRC

Common commands include /join, /part, /cycle, /msg, /query, /notice, /me, /nick, /away, /back, /who, /whois, /iwhois, /whowas, /list, /links, /invite, /kick, /ban, /kb, /op, /voice, /mode, /topic, and /names. Convenience aliases are part of the client. Scripts are not required to get a usable command set.

/msg sends from the active window. It does not open a query by itself. If a query already exists, the outgoing line is also recorded there. Incoming private messages open the query. /query explicitly opens one.

Service shortcuts are available as /nickserv, /chanserv, /memoserv, /operserv, /hostserv, /botserv, and /limitserv. They send the remaining command text to the named service without opening a query. /nickserv identify prompts for a password without echoing it. A password supplied directly to /nickserv identify is sent normally but masked in local output. Ordinary /msg remains an ordinary message and is not inspected for passwords.

/debug opens the exact incoming and outgoing IRC traffic for the active network. That includes PASS, service identification, OPER credentials, the reversible Base64 AUTHENTICATE payload used by SASL PLAIN, and anything else actually sent on the wire. Close the debug window before entering sensitive information if you do not want it retained in that window, and inspect copied debug output before sharing it. Debug windows can be logged with /logging just like other IRC windows; those logs are intentionally raw and may contain the same sensitive traffic.

Notify lists are network-specific. Use /notify add nickname, /notify remove nickname, and /notify list. When a server advertises MONITOR, clircs uses it for immediate server-side status changes. Other servers use silent batched ISON polling every 60 seconds.

Caller-ID mode and ACCEPT are available on servers that support them. /mode nickname +g enables the server mode. /accept nickname adds a nickname, /accept -nickname removes one, and bare /accept asks the server for the current list.

Output families such as WHO, WHOIS, WHOWAS, CTCP, notices, invites, links, list, and DNS have routing settings. Depending on the setting, output may go to the active window, status, or a dedicated result window.

Channel management and protection

The userlist stores network user records, masks, roles, comments, and channel policy. Use /help adduser, /help protect, /help cprot, and /help pprot for current syntax.

Channel protection watches channel events and can monitor, kick, or kickban according to the configured detector. Personal protection watches events directed at the client and temporarily ignores offenders when enforcement is enabled. Protection settings inherit from global to network to channel scope; `/cprot` and `/pprot` display the effective result. A monitor-only safety override is reported as the current protection state and records detections without taking action.

Clone detection is separate from flood protection. It reports users sharing an address and is enabled by default. Use /clones for details.

Logging

Use /logging or /log to inspect the effective logging rule for the active window. Logging may be enabled network-wide and overridden for an individual status, channel, query, DCC CHAT, or debug window. Logs are daily UTF-8 text files stored under the clircs user-data directory.

Scripting

Scripts are optional JavaScript addons. Use /script to list, load, reload, unload, and inspect them. Script manifests declare permissions. clircs does not silently grant IRC command access, local-network access, secret storage, or other capabilities merely because a script asked nicely.

Loaded script state is remembered across restarts. Script data is scoped to that script. Script secrets use Windows-protected storage. Runtime limits stop a runaway script from blocking the client indefinitely.

The bundled script-demo is a small API example. The musikcube addon is the more useful example: it controls an external program, registers commands, handles permissions and storage, and contributes content to the generic header area without adding musikcube-specific code to clircs itself.

DCC

clircs recognizes active and passive CHAT and SEND offers, assigns request IDs, lists pending and active requests, accepts and originates chats and transfers, and uses dedicated direct-chat and DCC result windows. Incoming CHAT offers are announced in the active window and do not open a DCC window unless accepted. IPv6 literal offers and traditional integer IPv4 offers are understood.

Incoming active DCC SEND offers can be accepted with /dcc accept id. Received data is written to a .clircs-part file and moved into place only after the advertised size arrives. Existing files are never overwritten; clircs chooses a numbered filename instead. The default destination is the user's Downloads folder. Inspect or change it with /set dcc.downloads folder.

If a transfer stops after receiving some data, clircs retains the partial file. Have the sender offer the same file again, then use /dcc resume id on the new request. clircs sends the traditional DCC RESUME request, validates DCC ACCEPT, and continues from the saved byte offset. Active and passive SEND resume are supported. A zero-byte or already complete file cannot be resumed.

Use /dcc send nick file to offer an active file transfer. Add --passive to make a passive offer. clircs waits for cumulative acknowledgements from the receiving client, updates one live progress entry, and supports quoted filenames, zero-byte files, and files larger than 4 GB. Only the final transfer result remains in scrollback and logs. /dcc cancel id stops a pending or active outgoing transfer. /dcc chat nick --passive does the same for CHAT.

Secure DCC CHAT uses the established SCHAT extension and TLS 1.2 or TLS 1.3:

/dcc schat nick
/dcc schat nick --passive

Incoming SCHAT requests use the ordinary /dcc accept id and /dcc reject id commands. Eggdrop's /ctcp bot schat flow works through the same incoming request path. The connection report includes the negotiated TLS version and the peer certificate fingerprint when the remote side supplies a certificate.

Secure DCC SEND uses the established SSEND extension and the same TLS versions:

/dcc ssend nick file
/dcc ssend nick file --passive

Incoming SSEND requests use /dcc accept id, /dcc resume id, and /dcc reject id. Active and passive secure transfers use the same collision-safe downloads, progress display, cancellation, acknowledgements, and resume handling as ordinary SEND. A failed SSEND connection is never retried as plaintext.

XDCC pack requests use the same incoming DCC transfer path:

/xdcc get bot pack
/xdcc sget bot pack

The first form asks the bot for an ordinary SEND; the second asks for SSEND and never falls back to plaintext. A pack can be written as 42 or #42. The bot's resulting offer still requires /dcc accept id or /dcc reject id, and all normal download, validation, progress, resume, and cancellation behavior applies.

SCHAT encrypts the direct connection, but legacy DCC has no useful certificate identity convention. clircs therefore reports that peer identity was not verified. It will not silently downgrade a failed SCHAT connection to plaintext or enable obsolete anonymous-DH ciphers. A KVIrc peer accepting a secure connection needs a usable certificate configured on its listening side. Eggdrop normally supplies the certificate for its secure chat listener.

Passive DCC reverses the listener when the initiating side cannot accept an incoming connection. The side that accepts the passive offer must still have a reachable address and port. Same-machine NAT loopback convenience is deferred. dcc.address and dcc.ports control what clircs advertises when it is the listening side.

Themes

Use /theme to show the current and available themes. Use /theme list, /theme reload, or /theme use name to manage them. Theme files control colors and presentation choices including buffer-name and nick-prefix display. Individual color values are edited in the theme file rather than through a forest of command-line settings.

Building from source

Requirements:

Windows 10 or Windows 11
.NET 10 SDK

From the source directory:

dotnet build clircs.sln

To run the test program:

dotnet run --project tests\Clircs.Core.Tests\Clircs.Core.Tests.csproj

To publish a development package:

dotnet publish src\Clircs.Console\Clircs.Console.csproj -c Release -o artifacts\clircs-version-windows

Current limitations

This is development software. Active, passive, resumed, and secure DCC have automated protocol and socket coverage but still need continued real-client interoperability testing. IRCd compatibility is intentionally broader than ratbox now, but unusual numerics and daemon-specific behavior can still require formatting work. The public graphical installer and self-contained release packages are planned for release packaging rather than these daily builds.
